An Earther's Guide to my World
==============================

Where can I even begin?

I suppose I will start with the skies. On Earth, if you look up on a clear day, you see mere blue nothingness---and somewhere in it, the sun. But if instead you look up on a clear night, you can see the whole universe before you. Earthers are lucky that way: your sky is limitless, an opportunity without bound.

With us, it is almost the reverse. If you look up at night all you see is the moon, embedded in an empty black void. But if you are lucky enough to look up on a clear and sunny day (for such days are rare), you can see the whole world, rising away from you on all sides, with all its continents and archipelagos, its mountains and its oceans, its rough, hard dirt and its cool, enveloping waters.

If you are still confused, Earther, think of it this way: You live on the outside of a ball. We live on the inside of one. There are no stars, no planets, no galaxies, no far-flung astronomic universe for us---just our world itself. We have known since first we had eyes to see that there was nowhere else to go. We lack even the word for "Universe", a word so much more expansive than "world" or "Earth".

Our Sun and Moon do not hang distantly revolving in the sky; each sits in a definite place. The Sun caps our ball at one end, the Moon at the other; together they are called the Eyes of God. Each sits at the peak of a mountain much higher than Everest. "Mountain" is perhaps inaccurate; at their peaks they are more like pillars. Our astronomers (another poor word, for they watch the sky, not the stars; they are also our cartographers and our weather-readers) tell us that the lands surrounding the Eyes are swathed constantly in clouds. It must be a strange place to live, if anyone does live there.

Day begins when the Sun, having lain dormant during the night, wakens to brighten the skies. It takes about two hours to reach full strength. Even then it is not as bright as your Sun, and it sheds a warm reddish hue---gentler to my eyes than your Sun's glaring yellow, but I doubt you would find it appealing. The Moon wanes as the Sun waxes, 

The continent where I was born, Forthyr, lies about halfway between Sun and Moon. The shadows there lie long, no matter if it is night or day.

There are four cardinal directions for us: Sunward, Moonward, North, and South. (I could as easily have called these last two East and West, or Clockwise and Anticlockwise, or Fi and Fum; but if you think of the Sun as being in the East, where on Earth it rises, then you will grasp which direction North and South are relative to Sunwards and Moonwards.)

-- EDIT
Our worlds could not be more different, and yet they are strangely similar. We have days and nights like yours; tides like yours; seasons, not quite like yours, but seasons nonetheless; even some animals and plants like yours (and some unlike yours).

If you find this landscape to be an unreasonable amalgamation of the alien and the familiar, you are not alone. Your world is just as alien and just as familiar to me.

If at this point you find yourself objecting, if you find this landscape alien, then you are not alone. Your world is just as alien to me. If your objection is couched in the language of natural science, of physics and mathematics---perhaps you wonder what force holds us to the inside of our ball, as gravity holds you to the outside of yours---then forgive me, but I do not know. Perhaps you simply want answers, scientific or no, to the obvious questions: What is outside the "ball" that we are on the inside of? What are the Sun and the Moon made of? Why do they brighten and dim at regular intervals? What causes our tides? Our seasons? How did our world come to be? How did we come to be?

I have no answers for you. We do of course have myths and legends, as you once did, to explain our world, to demystify it and bring it down to a human scale. Before I came here, I even believed some of them. But I do not have time to explain our legends to you, and I will not spend more words explaining that I do not know how to explain things. If you must have an explanation, call it "magic"; for magic is a very real thing in our world---but that is a subject for another time.

----------

There are three seasons on Forthyr. The year begins when snow gives way to rain and the monsoon season begins.

Monsoon - Dust/Dry - Winter
year begins when winter becomes monsoon
Average year is 300 days, varies between 200-400 usually.

Long years require storing food and careful rationing; short years don't leave enough time for aboveground crops to grow before the season changes.

When are crops grown anyway? monsoon season, mostly, or as monsoon turns into dust season. maybe store up water from monsoon season to irrigate during dust season? use giant underground cisterns, like the Fremen in Dune?

----------

People do travel overground if they need to or if it's faster, but year-round settlements are always underground, to survive the winter. A site without underground connections is completely isolated during the winter. (However, also protected from gloom monsters? Or from attacks by other people? Unclear. Maybe no advantage to this at all.)

Nomads (mostly Orcs) in the Moonward Wastes migrate from winter strongholds to monsoon/dry season sites (different spots for monsoon & dry season? how does nomad agriculture work? or are they hunter-gatherers?)
