1. Forthyr is on the *inside* of a hollow sphere (not the *outside* of a solid
one, like Earth).

2. There are three seasons: the Monsoons, the Dry season, and Winter. Winter
lasts half the year; it's so bad everybody lives underground during Winter.
During not-Winter everybody farms furiously.

3. There's scifi-level Ancient ruins and technology lying around all over the
place. Most underground cities are built on Ancient ruins.

4. Nobody can work Ancient tech except savvyheads. Savvyheads are born with an
intuitive gift for Ancient tech, but with mental handicaps (like real-world
savants).

5. Ancient Immortality Machines let two people enter, a master and a victim. The
master's mind walks out in the victim's body. The master's old body dies.

6. Society is feudally organized a la the High Middle Ages in Europe (ca. 1100
CE). Four hereditary castes: Peasant, Warrior, Priest, and Noble.

7. All religions believe in reincarnation.

8. Local religion, the Church of the Devout: large pantheon with cults for each
deity, emphasis on fate and staying in one's place; you're rewarded in your next
life if you do. Hates Immortality Machines.

9. Invading religion, Arhism: believe in *principles* of Good (Arha) and Evil
(Kamma). A socially progressive totalitarian theocracy. No castes, universal
education, communal child-rearing, non-sexist. Loves Immortality Machines.

10. Other religions/ethnic groups: Seekers of the Way (mystics seeking
enlightenment), Travellers (itinerant people, matriarchal, storytelling
tradition, mono/panentheistic religion).

11. Nonhuman races: Dwarves, Traders, Kobolds, Goblins (extinct), Orcs. Dwarves
= dwarves, mostly. Traders = not-to-be-fucked-with weirdos who buy humans
(slaves? nobody knows). Kobolds = clever creatures in Ancient ruins who trap
adventurers. Orcs = mutated humans, each one unique.

12. Magic is mostly non-physical. Illusions, psychic magic, scrying, etc; no
evocation, transmutation without massive energy source (eg. human sacrifice).
Loophole: spirit magic exists, and spirits *can* affect the physical world.
